.\" $Id: scm.5 1264 2011-10-19 22:22:51Z gsutre $
.
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010, 2011 CNRS & Université Bordeaux 1.
.\"
.\" Author(s): Grégoire Sutre <gregoire.sutre@labri.fr>
.\"            Alexander Heußner <alexander.heussner@ulb.ac.be>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd September 14, 2011
.Dt SCM 5 LOCAL
.Os
.\" ****************************************************************************
.Sh NAME
.Nm scm
.Nd scm language
.\" ****************************************************************************
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Em scm
textual language was introduced in the Ph.D. thesis of Tristan Le Gall.
An
.Em scm
model contains the description of a system of communicating machines.
This description is composed of two parts:
.Bl -dash
.It
A
.  Em header
that specifies the set of fifo channels and the message alphabet.
.It
A list of
.  Em automata ,
each modeling a communicating machine.
.El
.Pp
For model-checking purposes, the format also permits the specification of a set
of
.Em bad configurations .
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Ss Header
.Bl -enum
.It
Start the description of a system of communicating machines and specify its
name:
.  Pp
.  D1 Sy scm Ar ident Sy \&:
.It
Specify the number of channels:
.  Pp
.  D1 Sy nb_channels Sy \&= Ar integer Sy \&;
.  Pp
The set of channels is
.  Brq 0, ..., Va n Ns -1
where
.  Va n
is the number of channels.
By default, all channels are perfect.
.It
Tag some channels as lossy (optional):
.  Pp
.  D1 Op Sy lossy \&: Ar integer Op Sy \&, Ar integer ...
.It
Declare the message alphabet as follows:
.  Pp
.  D1 Sy parameters \&: Op Bro Sy int No \(ba Sy real Brc Ar ident Oo Sy \&= Ar expr Oc Sy \&; Ar ...
.  Pp
The alphabet is the same for all channels.
Each message holds a typed numerical value.
.El
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Ss Automata
.Bl -enum
.It
Start the description of an automaton and specify its name:
.  Pp
.  D1 Sy automaton Ar ident Sy \&:
.It
Declare the automaton's local variables (optional):
.  Pp
.  D1 Op Bro Sy int No \(ba Sy real Brc Ar ident Oo Sy \&= Ar expr Oc Sy \&; Ar ...
.It
Specify the automaton's initial states:
.  Pp
.  D1 Sy initial \&: Ar integer Op Sy \&, Ar integer ...
.It
Declare the automaton's states together with outgoing transitions:
.  Pp
.  D1 Sy state Ar integer Sy \&: Op Sy to Ar integer Sy \&: Ar command Sy \&; Ar ...
.  Pp
where
.  Ar command
is of the following form:
.  Pp
.  D1 Sy when Ar cond Oo Sy \&, Ar integer Bro Sy \&! No \(ba Sy \&? Brc Ar ident Oc Op Sy with Ar ident Sy \&= Ar expr Op Sy \&, Ar ident Sy \&= Ar expr ...
.El
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Ss Semantics
The operational semantics of a system of communicating machines is the usual
one: the automata move asynchronously according to their local transitions, and
they communicate exclusively through the channels.  Communication actions are
.Sy \&!
(send) and
.Sy \&?
(receive).  Channels are fifo, unbounded, and initially empty.  Note that
channels need not be point-to-point, they are shared by all automata.
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Ss Bad Configurations
The description of the system of communicating machines is, optionally,
followed by the specification of a set of bad configurations:
.Pp
.D1 Sy bad_states Sy \&: Sy \&( automaton Ar ident Sy \&: Ar badlocal ... Oo Sy with Ar regexp Oc Sy \&) Ar ...
.Pp
where
.Ar badlocal
is of the following form:
.Pp
.D1 Sy in Ar integer Sy \&: Ar cond ...
.Pp
The local constraints in a
.Ar badlocal
specification are
.Em disjuncted
together.
The
.Ar badlocal
specifications in a
.Sy bad_states
declaration are
.Em conjuncted
together.
.Pp
The queue contents are represented by a regular expression
.Ar regexp
as defined below.
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.Ss Regular Expressions
Queue contents for specifying bad states or displaying the current states
of a system of communicating machines are represented by regular expressions
of the following form:
.Bl -column "reg" ":" "x" -offset indent
.It Ar regexp Ta No \&::= Ta \ \& Sy \(ul No | Sy # No | Ar a No \ \&\ \& for Ar a No in the message alphabet
.It Ta Ta No | Ar regexp Sy \&. Ar regexp No | Sy \&( Ar regexp Sy \(ba Ar regexp Sy \&)
.It Ta Ta No | Ar regexp Sy ^* No | Ar regexp Sy ^+
.El
.Pp
The operators on regular expressions are interpreted as usually:
.Sy \&.
stands for concatenation,
.Sy \(ba
for disjunction,
.Sy ^*
is the reflexive-transitive closure, and
.Sy ^+
the transitive closure.
The empty word is denoted by
.Sy \(ul
.No \.
.Pp
The symbol
.Sy \&#
is interpreted as separator for channels in
.Ar regexp .
Each word matched by
.Ar regexp
must contain exactly
.Va n Ns -1
occurrences of
.Sy \&#
where
.Va n
is the number of channels.
.\" ****************************************************************************
.Sh EXAMPLE
The following example is the classical connection/disconnection protocol.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
scm connection_disconnection :

nb_channels = 2 ;
parameters :
   real o ;
   real c ;
   real d ;

automaton sender :

   initial : 0

   state 0 :
      to 1 : when true , 0 ! o ;

   state 1 :
      to 0 : when true , 0 ! c ;
      to 0 : when true , 1 ? d ;

automaton receiver :

   initial : 0

   state 0 :
      to 1 : when true , 0 ? o ;

   state 1 :
      to 0 : when true , 0 ? c ;
      to 0 : when true , 1 ! d ;

bad_states:
   (automaton receiver: in 0 : true with c.(o|c)^*.#.d^*)
.Ed
.Pp
This
.Em scm
model has two channels, with message alphabet
.Brq  Ar o , Ar c, Ar d .
There are two automata, a sender and a receiver.
Their states and transitions should be self-explanatory.
Bad configurations are those where (a) the receiver is in local state 0,
and (b) channel contents are in the regular expression detailed below.
.Pp
The regular expression
.Ar c
.Sy \.\&(
.Ar o
.Sy \(ba
.Ar c
.Sy )^*\.
.Sy \&#
.Sy \&.
.Ar d
.Sy ^*
is interpreted as the set of contents of two channels:
.Bl -dash
.It
The first containing any word over the alphabet
.Brq  Ar o , Ar c
that starts with a message
.Ar c .
.It
The second containing an arbitrary sequence of
.Ar d
(which can be of zero length, i.e., empty).
.El
.\" ****************************************************************************
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr control 1 ,
.Xr verify 1
